.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH URINGSCOPE 8 "June 2026" "uringscope 0.2.0" "System Administration"
.SH NAME
uringscope \- flight recorder and doctor for io_uring applications
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B uringscope
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] [\-\-] \fICOMMAND\fR [\fIARGS\fR...]
.br
.B uringscope
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] \fB\-p\fR \fIPID\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B uringscope
attaches CO-RE eBPF programs to the kernel's io_uring tracepoints and
reports what a process's rings actually did: per-opcode latency histograms
(aggregated in the kernel), async-punt detection, SQPOLL stalls, io-wq
worker fan-out, batching efficiency, CQ overflow and error counters,
completion-leak detection, and a "doctor" that names pathologies with
evidence and a suggested fix. With a dynamically linked liburing it also
measures the two boundary segments kernel tracepoints cannot see: submit
batching and CQE-ready\(->reap lag (best-effort uprobes; see
.IR docs/end-to-end.md ).
.PP
It requires a kernel with CONFIG_DEBUG_INFO_BTF=y and CAP_BPF +
CAP_PERFMON (or root). At startup it probes the kernel's BTF and prints a
support-tier table; a missing or re-prototyped tracepoint degrades one
feature instead of failing the load.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-p ", " \-\-pid " " \fIPID\fR
Observe an already-running process. Rings created before attach are
discovered from /proc.
.TP
.BR \-a ", " \-\-all
Observe every io_uring user on the system.
.TP
.BR \-f ", " \-\-follow
Also observe children/threads forked by the target. Events match by ring
ownership and fork ancestry (bounded parent-chain walk) instead of one
tgid.
.TP
.BR \-d ", " \-\-duration " " \fISEC\fR
Stop after \fISEC\fR seconds (or when the target exits, whichever comes
first).
.TP
.BR \-c ", " \-\-summary
Compact report: the per-op table and doctor findings only, like
.BR strace \ \-c .
(Before 0.2, \-c meant \-\-check.)
.TP
.BR \-e ", " \-\-filter " " \fITOKENS\fR
Display filter, comma-separated; collection is unaffected.
.BR op= \fINAME\fR[, \fINAME\fR...]
shows only those opcodes;
.B punt
only rows with punted requests;
.B error
only rows with errors;
.B all
resets.
.TP
.BR \-i ", " \-\-interval " " \fISEC\fR
Live mode: reprint the per-op delta table every \fISEC\fR seconds while
the target runs (iostat-style snapshot-and-delta). Doctor findings still
come from the full window at exit.
.TP
.B \-\-metrics \fR[\fIHOST\fR:]\fIPORT\fR
Serve OpenMetrics text at http://\fIHOST\fR:\fIPORT\fR/metrics from a
zero-dependency background thread. Snapshots refresh on the \-i interval
(default 5s).
.TP
.B \-\-json\fR[=\fIPATH\fR]
Emit the full report as one JSON object (per-opcode stats, counters,
doctor findings, end-to-end data). With no PATH it goes to stdout and
replaces the human report. "\-\-json PATH" is also accepted when PATH ends
in .json.
.TP
.B \-\-baseline \fIFILE\fR
Save the JSON report to \fIFILE\fR at exit, for a later \-\-diff.
.TP
.B \-\-diff \fIFILE\fR
After the report, print a delta table (IOPS, p50/p99 per opcode, punt%)
against a previously saved baseline, with doctor commentary on what
changed.
.TP
.B \-\-check
Hazard (correctness) mode: detect overlapping in-flight buffer ranges,
registered-buffer lifetime violations, and munmap of memory an in-flight
request still targets. Higher overhead; use it like AddressSanitizer for
your io_uring test suite. The allocator-freelist use-after-free variant
fires no syscall and is not detectable (see
.IR docs/buffer-hazards.md ).
.TP
.BR \-t ", " \-\-trace " " \fIFILE\fR
Also record a per-request timeline as Perfetto/Chrome JSON (open at
ui.perfetto.dev). Higher overhead: streams every event to userspace.
.TP
.B \-\-list\-ops
Print the opcode table and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Print the version and this kernel's support-tier table, then exit.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-doctor
Skip the diagnosis section of the report.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
libbpf debug output, including the kernel verifier log on a program load
failure.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B URINGSCOPE_DEBUG
Diagnostics level (0\(en2). 1 enables startup/exit-time reporting: per-stage
timing, map fill levels (the usual cause of undercounted stats), and a hint
pointing at the verifier log on a load failure. 2 additionally streams the
libbpf/verifier debug output (implies \fB\-v\fR). This is userspace-only and
runs only at startup and exit \(em it has no effect on the in-kernel data
path or the map-aggregation hot path, so it is safe to leave enabled.
.SH EXIT STATUS
When spawning a command, uringscope exits with the command's exit status;
otherwise 0 on success and nonzero on setup failure.
.SH EXAMPLES
.nf
uringscope ./myapp                 # run under the scope, full report
uringscope -c -p $(pidof fio)      # compact summary of a running pid
uringscope -i 2 -p 31337           # live per-op deltas every 2s
uringscope --check -- ./tests      # buffer-hazard mode over a test suite
uringscope --json r.json -- ./app  # machine-readable report
uringscope --metrics :9090 -a      # Prometheus endpoint, whole box
.fi
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR strace (1),
.BR perf (1),
.BR io_uring_setup (2)
.PP
Documentation: docs/lifecycle.md, docs/buffer-hazards.md,
docs/end-to-end.md, docs/tracepoints.md in the source tree.
